---
title: "*For Whom the Bell Tolls*"
---

*For Whom the Bell Tolls* by Ernest Hemmingway.

# Review
I really enjoyed it. Hemmingway is a talented writer, especially for the male reader. He captures everything so well, from interpersonal relationships, to internal dialogue, to romance and sexual urges. 

The story was also fascinating. I have seen many works of art reference the Spanish civil war, everything from Picasso's "Guernica" to *Pan's Labyrinth*. This, like the others, takes the side of the communists against the fascists. I somehow never managed to learn much about the Spanish civil war, probably for two reasons: first, it was, like the French revolution, a confusing mix of events and movements, and second, was immediately overshadowed by World War II. But what makes it especially interesting is that it comes before Communism really got its bad name. In the story, the Communists are the good guys. It was a time when Fascism was a dire threat. 

Hemmingway helps me understand Communism better than I have before. One of the things that makes the book great is how detailed and honest he is. He apparently got some flak from progressives and communists for describing not just fascist atrocities, but the communist ones, too, and one particularly vivid and memorable chapter where the communists take a city, and make the fascists go through a gauntlet before being run or thrown off a cliff. He captures the mood of the mob as it goes from tentative, to agitated, to aggressive, to remorseful, to overcome by psychotic anarchists and drunks who then devolve into a violent mob. And of course it's that way. It's not like communists, fascists, British imperialists, American soldiers, or any other number of groups who have committed atrocities are a different species than you or I. The difference is the group dynamics, the emergent characteristics of the collective, particularly as different kinds of people become dominant (in this case, as the sociopaths took over). The book examines in detail how different people deal with the exigencies of war. A theme gets repeated that killing is necessary but wrong. 

The book also highlighted what, I think, is the downfall of Communism, which is it's religious devotion to politics. There really isn't any difference between theocracy and this kind of communism (which has been the only kind of communism in power at meaningful scale). People are evaluated on their devotion to the Party, not necessarily on their technical skill. The protagonist in the book is an American professor working as a dynamiter in the war. But he, like Hemingway himself, while very sympathetic to the communist cause, was not a communist himself. It's easy for me to forget that even within communism, there is a division between party members and other comrades. It was the same in Nazism as well, with the SS being a separate entity from the military and other branches of government, and sometimes in conflict with it. Just as, during the heyday of Catholicism, the Church was not the same thing as the Government, even though the Church exerted total or near-total power over the government. Communism in many ways simply replaces the tokens of Fascism like the Church or the State with a different token, the Party. But the similarities dwarf the differences. Perhaps what made the US work so well was not solely recognizing that Church and state need be kept separate, but a more general principle that Ideology and State need be kept separate, the Church being only one kind of ideology, and perhaps not even the most dangerous kind. Because while the French Revolution also separated church and state, they failed to separate ideology and state, and the result was ugly. It makes me respect Washington so much more, that in his first Inauguration he would denounce political parties. Every other man in his position, it seems, used the opportunity to extol political parties—or at least his particular party. 

_(Warning: spoilers ahead)_

The book really brings this point home when discussing the different personnel in command of the Republican (communist) war effort. In one part of the story, [spoiler] a man is sent to deliver important information to the general who will be leading an offensive against the fascist lines. Hemmingway poignantly says that the man, who was one of the guerillas behind fascists lines, made his way speedily and without problem through fascist territory, but once he got to his own side, was besought be incompetence, stupidity, and paranoia. At one point, he reaches a political commmisar who is insane, who everyone knows is insane, but that no one does anything about because he was an important figure in the Communist party. [/spoiler] Political devotion literally makes the cause weaker, because it makes them stupider and less competent. One of the great business innovations of the 20th century was moving away from family management to professional managers—the father and owner of a business hiring the guy who had talent and skill, as opposed to letting his incompetent son run the business into the ground. Such an obvious thing to us, but it's one of the reasons that the US became an economic powerhouse in the early 1900s, and then, after Europe was devastated by war, became the most dominant economic force the world has ever seen. Also one of the reasons why Mexico may still be lagging, because in Mexico the norm is still to take care of family first.

The insights of the book for today leapt off the page. We're observing the GOP accelerate along a transition from loose political affiliation to something that deserves allegiance, even over country. The Democrats were in many ways ahead of that transition before, now falling behind but still with a powerful, overriding Ideology that gets much too much deference, resulting in injustices and incompetence. And all of this can happen even if only a small percentage of the population is ideological. None of this bodes well. In a war between Fascists and Communists, nobody wins.